# Version Control:

## Git, GitHub and the Beauty of Commiting

**October 30, 2014**

Now, I am not what you would call a *gamer*, but I have watched my share of games growing up. When I say "watched," I don't just mean casually glancing at people playing games. What I mean is that I stayed up for 24 hours straight or however long it took, watching my brother play Final Fantasy VIII. The story was just so good, the game itself was exciting, and well...I was a **huge** sucker for the Squall-and-Rinoa awkward romance (and the incredibly amazing soundtrack). What does this have to do with the supposed topic at hand? Well, not much really. Except for a single aspect: checkpoints. I actually think they might have been called "Save Points" in Final Fantasy VIII, but I digress. What I am trying to say is that version control is a lot like these save points. Save points save exactly where you are in the game, along with your current health status, items obtained, and every experience point gained from slaying bad guys along the way. Similarly, having version control means that you essentially save a snapshot of your code at a particular point in time. It's handy for a multitude of reasons, not least of which is that it acts as a backup should you decide that you need to do things over from a certain point.

This is where git comes in. Git is the program through which you are able to save these screenshots of your code at different times. It is actually pretty straightforward once you get the hang of it, although I will freely admit that when I was first learning I had a few tear-my-hair-out moments. If you are at that frustrating point, don't worry, this too shall pass (after a little more practice). GitHub on the other hand is like your local directory...except it is located in the world of the interwebz. Why use GitHub? Well, GitHub is great when you're working on a project on your own, but it really shines when you are working on a project with multiple people. Part of your team lives in Germany and the other half lives in Asia? No problem, you can all access the same documents. GitHub makes it so that you can *fetch* the changes that other people have *pushed* into your shared GitHub repository (a fancy schmancy way of saying "directory" or "folder"), and you can then locally *merge* your changes with theirs, *add* your newly modified document to the staging area on git, *commit* your changes, and in turn *push* the modified document back to the shared GitHub repository so that other people can then access your changes!

It sounds nuts, doesn't it? I know, it sounds super complicated. But trust me, once you get it, you'll be like me. Everytime I push my changes to GitHub and I see my changes reflected in the interwebz for all to see, I get this voice in my head that goes, "Yer a wizard, Harry."

You can be a wizard too. Best feeling in the world.